pmc J Biol Chem J Biol Chem 567 jbc The Journal of Biological Chemistry 0021-9258 1083-351X American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology PMC12444477 PMC12444477.1 12444477 12444477 40752575 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110556 S0021-9258(25)02407-X 110556 1 JBC Reviews The regulation of lipid A biosynthesis Hummels Katherine R. katherine.hummels@uga.edu ∗ Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA ∗ For correspondence: Katherine R. Hummels katherine.hummels@uga.edu 9 2025 31 7 2025 301 9 495267 110556 31 5 2025 24 7 2025 31 07 2025 19 09 2025 19 09 2025 © 2025 The Authors 2025 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Gram-negative bacteria surround their inner membrane and cell wall with an asymmetric outer membrane which contains lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in its outer leaflet. In addition to serving as a potent permeability barrier, the LPS-rich outer membrane also contributes to the structural integrity of the cell envelope and, thus, the ability to synthesize LPS is essential in most Gram-negative bacteria. Although the cell must make enough LPS to support growth, its biosynthesis must be tightly regulated as overproduction of the acylated disaccharide domain of LPS, lipid A, is deleterious to bacterial viability. The committed enzyme of the lipid A biosynthetic pathway, LpxC, serves as a major regulatory node to control flux through the pathway and ensure that the cell has enough, but not too much, LPS. The regulation of LpxC in the model organism Escherichia coli has been the subject of immense study, which has led to a detailed understanding of the regulation of LPS biogenesis that has served as a paradigm for other organisms. Recent work, however, has revealed diverse mechanisms used by different species to regulate LpxC and highlights that regulation at alternative points in the LPS biosynthetic pathway have the potential to influence LPS production. Here, the discovery and subsequent molecular dissection of the varied strategies used to regulate LPS biosynthesis are reviewed as well as the physiological consequences of LPS dysregulation. Keywords lipopolysaccharide lipid A lipid synthesis cellular regulation outer membrane LpxC cell envelope pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes Abbreviations ACP acyl carrier protein CoA Coenzyme A FAS II type II fatty acid synthesis GPL glycerophospholipid IM inner membrane Kdo 3-deoxy-D-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid LapB lipopolysaccharide assembly protein B LPS lipopolysaccharide Lpt lipopolysaccharide transport OM outer membrane PG peptidoglycan UDP-GlcNAc uridine diphosphate-N-acetyl-glucosamine Reviewed by members of the JBC Editorial Board. Edited by Chris Whitfield The Gram-negative cell envelope is a complex structure comprised of three concentric layers: an inner membrane (IM) composed of glycerophospholipids (GPLs), a cell wall made up of peptidoglycan (PG), and an asymmetric outer membrane (OM) with GPLs on the inner leaflet and an outer leaflet largely composed of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) ( 1 ). The permeability barrier imposed by this structure, due in large part to the presence of LPS in the OM, is a major driver of intrinsic antibiotic resistance observed in Gram-negative bacteria ( 2 ). LPS is an amphipathic molecule made up of three main structural domains: lipid A, core, and O-antigen. Lipid A is an acylated glucosamine-based disaccharide that anchors LPS in the lipid bilayer and is ligated to a series of outward-facing sugar residues that compose the core and O-antigen domains of LPS ( 3 ). Lipid A along with the first sugar(s) of the core, 3-deoxy-D- manno -oct-2-ulosonic acid (Kdo), collectively called Kdo-lipid A ( Fig. 1 A ), is considered essential in most Gram-negative bacteria and the enzymes responsible for its production are highly conserved ( 4 ). Figure 1 Lipid A biosynthesis. A , chemical structure of Kdo-lipid A from Escherichia coli . B , depiction of the Kdo-lipid A biosynthesis pathway. LpxA, the first enzyme in the lipid A biosynthesis pathway, catalyzes the reversible acylation of UDP-GlcNAc using FAS II-derived β-hydroxyacyl-ACP molecules, metabolic precursors shared with the PG and GPL biosynthetic pathways, respectively. The LpxA product is deacetylated by the committed enzyme in the lipid A biosynthetic pathway, LpxC. Following LpxC catalysis, lipid A production is completed by a series of chemical reactions catalyzed by LpxD, LpxH/I/G, LpxB, LpxK, WaaA, LpxL, and LpxM. See main text for details. LpxC (highlighted in red ) serves as the best characterized regulatory node in the LPS biosynthesis pathway, but other enzymes in the pathway (highlighted in blue ) have also been implicated in controlling the production of LPS. Other relevant enzymes in the PG and FAS II synthesis pathways are presented in gray . Kdo, 3-deoxy-D- manno -oct-2-ulosonic acid; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; GPL, glycerophospholipid; PG, peptidoglycan; UDP-GlcNAc, uridine diphosphate-N-acetyl-glucosamine; ACP, acyl carrier protein; FAS II, type II fatty acid synthesis. Kdo-lipid A is synthesized in the bacterial cytoplasm from a series of catalytic reactions that make up the Raetz pathway, named after Christian Raetz whose group pioneered the identification and characterization of the nine enzymes that make up the pathway (reviewed in ( 3 , 5 , 6 ) ( Fig. 1 B ). The first enzyme in the Raetz pathway, LpxA, acylates uridine diphosphate- N -acetyl-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) using a β-hydroxyacyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) substrate made by the type II fatty acid synthesis pathway (FAS II) ( 7 ). The reaction catalyzed by LpxA is thermodynamically unfavorable, and it is the second enzyme in the pathway, LpxC, that catalyzes the first irreversible and committed step in lipid A biosynthesis ( 8 , 9 ). LpxC is a deacetylase that removes the acetyl group from the GlcNAc moiety to allow for the addition of the next acyl group by LpxD and subsequent removal of UMP by LpxH, LpxI, or LpxG depending on the organism ( Fig. 1 B ) ( 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ). LpxB then catalyzes the formation of a tetra-acylated disaccharide intermediate, which is phosphorylated by LpxK to produce lipid IV A ( 14 , 15 ) ( Fig. 1 B ). Next, WaaA adds a number of Kdo residues that depends on the organism to form the first sugar(s) of the core, resulting in Kdo-lipid IV A which is sequentially acylated by LpxL and LpxM to finally form Kdo-lipid A ( 16 , 17 , 18 ) ( Fig. 1 B ). The nine steps in the Raetz pathway as well as the subsequent addition of the core sugars are catalyzed in the cytoplasm or the cytoplasmic leaflet of the IM, but the resulting core-lipid A must ultimately be transported to the OM. Transport is achieved in two steps. In the first, core-lipid A is flipped from the cytoplasmic leaflet to the periplasmic leaflet of the IM by the flippase MsbA (reviewed in ( 19 )). Once facing the periplasm, O-antigen can be ligated onto core-lipid A prior to its transport to the OM by the lipopolysaccharide transport (Lpt) system (reviewed in ( 20 )). The synthesis of lipid A and its subsequent assembly into the OM have long-been viewed as ideal targets for antibiotics, as it is essential and unique to Gram-negative bacteria. From numerous drug discovery endeavors, small molecules that inhibit the Raetz pathway enzymes and LPS transporters have been identified, a subset of which have progressed to clinical trials ( 21 , 22 ). The physiological consequences associated with impaired LPS synthesis and assembly are vast, consistent with the essentiality of LPS. Intriguingly, overproduction of LPS results in similar growth inhibition, with the physiological consequences discussed below. A detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms used by bacteria to increase or reduce the production of LPS therefore has the potential to directly inform therapeutic development. Effects of misregulated lipid A biosynthesis The ability of Gram-negative bacteria to control lipid A biosynthesis is critical for viability. In most Gram-negative organisms, LPS is essential and thus too little LPS can directly impair growth and viability ( 23 , 24 ). Even slight decreases in LPS production can have substantial effects on membrane permeability and function. Indeed, mutations that reduce LPS biosynthesis have been reported to result in cellular chaining ( 25 , 26 , 27 ), reduced virulence ( 28 ), and increased sensitivity to both antibiotics and high temperature ( 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ) ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, it is becoming increasingly apparent that LPS plays a significant role in the structural integrity of the cell envelope, a function that has historically been attributed to the cell wall ( 33 , 34 , 35 ). As such, there is substantial selective pressure to ensure that cells produce enough LPS to support proper OM function. Figure 2 Phenotypic consequences of misregulated production of lipid A , summary of phenotypes associated with Gram-negative bacterial strains that exhibit reduced ( left ), wild-type ( middle ), or elevated ( right ) production of LPS. A , graphic representation of the cell envelope under each condition. Lipid A is depicted in purple and the core and O-antigen domains of LPS are depicted in blue . When LPS production is impaired, phospholipids accumulate in the outer leaflet of the OM, disrupting the permeability barrier. In WT cells under standard laboratory conditions, the Lpt system readily transports nascent LPS to the OM, leading to low levels of LPS in the IM and robust OM function. When LPS production is heightened to the point where it exceeds the transport capacity of the Lpt system, LPS intermediates accumulate in the inner membrane and form periplasmic membrane structures. B , changes to E. coli cellular morphology observed upon altered LPS biosynthesis. When LPS production is reduced, chains of shortened cells are observed. When LPS production is increased, cellular filamentation is elevated. C , select phenotypic outcomes associated with reduced and elevated LPS biosynthesis. LPS, lipopolysaccharide; IM, inner membrane; OM, outer membrane; Lpt, lipopolysaccharide transport. Hyperproduction of LPS is similarly detrimental to cellular viability for a variety of reasons. Lipid A biosynthesis relies on acyl-ACP and UDP-GlcNAc precursors, which are essential for GPL and PG biosynthesis, respectively ( 36 , 37 , 38 ) ( Fig. 1 B ). Thus, elevated synthesis of LPS has the potential to indirectly affect GPL and PG production due to competition for shared precursors. In addition, once LPS levels exceed the capacity allowed by the OM and the Lpt transport system, LPS accumulates in the IM, which results in the formation of periplasmic membrane structures ( 39 , 40 ) ( Fig. 2 ). This aberrant accumulation of LPS in the IM appears to be toxic, as some of the growth defects associated with Escherichia coli mutants that hyperproduce LPS can be suppressed by deleting a protein that tethers the OM to the cell wall, lpp , thereby elevating OM vesiculation to promote the loss of OM-embedded LPS and make space for nascent LPS ( 31 , 41 ). Furthermore, there is evidence that detergent-like LPS intermediates that accumulate upon hyperactivation of early stages in the Raetz pathway can be toxic, as depletion of the later-stage enzymes LpxH and LpxK resulted in growth defects that could be suppressed by inhibition of LpxA or LpxC in Acinetobacter baumannii , one of the few known organisms in which LPS is not essential ( 42 , 43 , 44 ). In addition to reduced viability, mutant strains that overproduce lipid A exhibit cellular filamentation, incomplete LPS maturation ( 40 , 41 ), antibiotic sensitivity ( 45 , 46 ), osmotic stress sensitivity ( 46 ), and temperature sensitivity ( 41 , 46 ) ( Fig. 2 ). Thus, there is also substantial selective pressure to prevent cells from producing too much LPS. To ensure that enough, but not too much, LPS is synthesized, Gram-negative bacteria tightly regulate the production of lipid A. The regulatory strategies that govern lipid A biosynthesis are of immense interest due not only to their fascinating biological implications, but also their connection to bacterial viability and OM permeability, which are directly relevant to therapeutic development. Although the physiological impacts of misregulated LPS biosynthesis are likely to be conserved, recent work has highlighted that the molecular strategies used by bacteria to control lipid A production are not. Instead, diverse bacteria have evolved unique systems to modulate the synthesis of this critical cell envelope component. Work over the past several decades has revealed a variety of molecular mechanisms that regulate the production of LPS, often at the level of the committed enzyme in the pathway, LpxC. Regulation of LpxC in E. coli Many of the early studies of lipid A biosynthesis focused on E. coli and, as such, it is the organism in which the regulation of lipid A biosynthesis has been best described. In particular, LpxC in E. coli ( Ec LpxC) has emerged as a critical point of regulation to control flux through the Raetz pathway and the molecular characterization of the factors that influence its activity has yielded a detailed model of how LPS synthesis is regulated in this organism. This work has been formative to the field and has provided a basis for understanding the interconnected pathways that control cell envelope biosynthesis. Ec LpxC is proteolytically regulated by FtsH The first evidence of lipid A biosynthesis regulation was reported in the same study that identified LpxC as the committed enzyme in the pathway. Specifically, Anderson et al found that LpxC activity was raised 5- to 10-fold in temperature-sensitive LpxA mutants grown in the nonpermissive condition ( 8 ). However, the manner by which LpxC was regulated did not become clear until a subsequent study that showed LpxC activity increased post transcriptionally under conditions that reduced lipid A production ( 47 ). These studies suggested the level of lipid A, or some biosynthetic intermediate, was sensed by an unknown mechanism and used to inform the rate of either LpxC translation or proteolysis. The specifics of this newfound regulation, however, were unclear. FtsH was identified shortly thereafter as a protease that targets LpxC. FtsH is a hexameric, ATP-dependent, and membrane-embedded protease that is broadly conserved among bacteria ( 48 ). Early attempts to characterize FtsH in E. coli found it to be essential, but a strain harboring a catalytically inactive variant of FtsH was able to be isolated through the acquisition of a secondary suppressor mutation termed sfhC21 (for suppressor of f ts H ) ( 49 , 50 , 51 ). Ogura et al subsequently mapped the sfhC21 mutation to a missense allele in fabZ , encoding the hypermorphic FabZ (L85P) variant ( 39 ). FabZ is situated at a critical point in the FAS II system: it catalyzes the dehydration of β-hydroxyacyl-ACPs to continue acyl chain elongation ( 52 ). Although it is one of two β-hydroxyacyl-ACP hydratases encoded by E. coli , it is largely responsible for the elongation of saturated long chain substrates, including the Ec LpxA substrate R- 3-hydroxymyristoyl-ACP ( 53 ). Thus, once acyl chains have reached the appropriate length, FabZ competes with Ec LpxA for their common substrate. As such, the level of FabZ activity has the potential to directly impact lipid A production through impacting the abundance of a shared precursor. Indeed, a hypomorphic FabZ variant had been previously shown to suppress a temperature-sensitive lpxA mutant, likely through elevating the availability of R -3-hydroxymyristoyl-ACP ( 52 ). Thus, Ogura et al reasoned that the essential function of FtsH may be through modulation of membrane lipid biosynthesis. Subsequent analysis of GPL and LPS production revealed that, although GPL levels were largely unchanged, LPS accumulated approximately 50% more when FtsH was inactivated compared to the permissive conditions ( 39 ). Furthermore, the accumulation of LPS in the absence of FtsH was suppressed by the sfhC21 allele, suggesting that the hyperproduction of LPS was related to the essential function of FtsH ( 39 ). With the knowledge that FtsH modulates LPS biosynthesis in hand, Ogura et al wondered if FtsH was the post transcriptional regulator of LpxC that had been previously reported. Indeed, they found that the specific activity of LpxC increased in ftsH mutant lysates and observed a concomitant accumulation of LpxC protein ( 39 ). Furthermore, in vitro biochemical characterization showed that FtsH was able to directly degrade LpxC, confirming FtsH as the first example of a direct regulator of lipid A biosynthesis ( 39 ). This seminal study not only explained how Ec LpxC was specifically regulated but also emphasized several themes in the regulation of cell envelope synthesis that have greatly influenced the field. Namely, hyperaccumulation of LPS is detrimental to cells and balancing LPS biosynthesis with the production of other cell envelope components is critical. FtsH-mediated proteolysis of Ec LpxC is controlled by LapB and YejM FtsH is responsible for the degradation of numerous protein substrates in addition to LpxC, including the heat-shock sigma factor σ 32 , the lambda regulator cII, and diverse membrane proteins ( 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ). It seemed clear that FtsH was able to discriminate among its substrates in response to specific signals, however, as altered LPS biosynthesis specifically impacted the ability of FtsH to degrade Ec LpxC and not another proteolytic target, σ 32 ( 39 ). It was subsequently shown that Ec LpxC contains a C-terminal degron sequence composed of six nonpolar residues (LAXXXXXAVLA) that is critical for its ability to be recognized by FtsH ( 60 , 61 ). Notably, this degron sequence is distinct from other FtsH substrates ( 48 , 60 ), but it was unclear how FtsH recognized such diverse substrates and specifically singled out LpxC for degradation under conditions in which LPS production was high. In 2014, several groups independently reported the involvement of a heat shock responsive IM-protein LapB (lipopolysaccharide assembly protein B; formerly called YciM) in cell envelope integrity ( 41 , 45 , 46 ). Specifically, it was shown that lapB mutation was only tolerated in a subset of E. coli strains and that those strains in which lapB was mutated exhibited hypersensitivity to antibiotics, elevated cell envelope stress response pathways, and filamentous cellular morphology similar to that observed upon overexpression of Ec LpxC ( 41 , 45 , 46 , 61 ). Two of these initial studies took advantage of the dramatic phenotypes associated with lapB deletion and isolated mutants that restored growth under nonpermissive conditions, many of which mapped to the Ec lpxC gene ( 41 , 45 ). Furthermore, Ec LpxC levels increased in the absence of LapB, resulting in an accumulation of LPS ( 41 , 45 ). Importantly, lapB deletion did not affect the stability of σ 32 , another FtsH substrate, leading one group to propose that LapB might serve as an adapter that facilitated regulated proteolysis of Ec LpxC by FtsH ( 45 ). In support of this model, LapB was shown to copurify with FtsH ( 41 ). The role of LapB as an adaptor protein was later confirmed by biochemical studies in which LapB addition dramatically elevated the rate in which FtsH degraded Ec LpxC ( 62 ). Detailed enzymatic characterization revealed that the increased FtsH-mediated degradation of Ec LpxC observed in the presence of LapB was likely a result of enhanced binding affinity for Ec LpxC ( 62 ). In further support of LapB serving as an adaptor, it was shown to interact directly with both FtsH (through its transmembrane helix) and Ec LpxC (through tetratricopeptide repeats in its cytosolic domain) ( 62 ). More recently, structural analysis of LapB- Ec LpxC interaction has revealed that LapB makes extensive contacts with the N terminal and central regions of the Ec LpxC degron, bringing the C terminal tail in close proximity to the membrane where it would be readily accessible to the FtsH active site ( 63 ). Intriguingly, LapB also makes extensive contacts near the hydrophobic tunnel of Ec LpxC that accommodates substrate binding and, consistent with this, LapB binding is sufficient to reduce Ec LpxC activity by approximately 80% in vitro ( 63 ). Thus, LapB appears to regulate Ec LpxC at two levels: first, LapB binds to Ec LpxC to immediately reduce its activity and second, it directs Ec LpxC to FtsH for proteolysis ( 63 ). Why LapB might inhibit Ec LpxC via two mechanisms and whether both are physiologically relevant under all conditions is unclear. Intriguingly, LapB expression is elevated after heat shock, a condition that is associated with an increase in unfolded proteins which have been suggested to be targeted by FtsH ( 59 ). Perhaps heat shock or other proteotoxic conditions result in increased competition between Ec LpxC and unfolded proteins for proteolysis by FtsH, thereby increasing the need for direct inhibition of Ec LpxC by LapB. Future work to carefully disentangle the functions of LapB as an adaptor and inhibitor are needed to clarify its precise role in the regulation of LpxC. The discovery of LapB provided an explanation for how FtsH could specifically degrade Ec LpxC under certain conditions without affecting its other proteolytic targets. How the status of LPS biosynthesis was sensed and used to inform FtsH-mediated proteolysis of Ec LpxC, however, was still unknown. Recently, it has become clear that the membrane protein YejM (called PbgA in Salmonella ) is capable of both binding to periplasmic LPS and acting as an antiadaptor of LapB, thus serving to sense LPS levels and modulate Ec LpxC degradation accordingly. As early as 1997, a mutant strain termed LH530 was reported to have phenotypes characteristic of altered OM biogenesis including sensitivity to antibiotics, periplasmic leakage, and reduced LPS biosynthesis, but at the time the location of the mutation that caused these phenotypes was unknown ( 64 , 65 ). Over a decade later, the LH530 phenotypes were shown to be a result of a nonsense mutation in yejM that significantly truncated the protein ( 66 ). Although LH530 was viable when propagated at low temperature, complete deletion of yejM was not tolerated under any conditions tested, indicating that YejM was essential for viability ( 66 ). The essential function of YejM remained unclear until several groups independently reported a connection between YejM and Ec LpxC in 2019 to 2020. To better understand why YejM was essential, one group set out to biochemically characterize YejM and found that it copurified with LapB ( 67 ). Concurrently, several other groups tackled the question by isolating genetic suppressors of yejM mutants and all identified mutations in Ec lpxC, lapB, and/or ftsH ( 27 , 28 , 31 , 32 ). The biochemical and genetic interactions between YejM and Ec LpxC/LapB/FtsH were all predicted to impact Ec LpxC specific activity, indicating that YejM mutation might alter Ec LpxC levels. Indeed, Ec LpxC abundance was dramatically reduced in yejM mutants, resulting in decreased production of LPS ( 27 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 67 ). Further, structural characterization of YejM showed that it contained an LPS binding pocket in its periplasmic surface, providing a means to sense the status of LPS biosynthesis ( 67 ). Together, these studies supported a model in which YejM inhibits LapB-FtsH mediated proteolysis of Ec LpxC unless LPS accumulates in the periplasmic leaflet of the cytoplasmic membrane ( 27 , 30 , 31 , 67 ). Consistent with this, subsequent biochemical and structural analyses showed that YejM directly interacted with LapB, that the LPS and LapB binding sites of YejM overlapped, and that the addition of LPS to YejM reduced its capacity to interact with LapB ( 62 ). Further, YejM sequestered the same region of LapB used to interact with FtsH ( 62 ). Thus, a series of partner switching events elegantly explains the ability of Ec LpxC levels to respond to changes in LPS production ( Fig. 3 ). Under conditions in which LPS levels are relatively low, YejM sequesters LapB, preventing FtsH-mediated proteolysis of Ec LpxC ( Fig. 3 A ). In contrast, when LPS levels are relatively high, LPS intermediates accumulate in the periplasmic leaflet of the IM as they await transport and bind to YejM ( Fig. 3 B ). When YejM is bound to LPS, LapB is freed to inhibit Ec LpxC and subsequently direct it to FtsH for proteolysis to reduce lipid A biosynthesis ( Fig. 3 B ). Figure 3 Regulation of LpxC in Escherichia coli . A , when LPS levels are low, YejM binds to LapB, preventing it from promoting FtsH-mediated proteolysis of LpxC. B , under conditions in which LPS levels are high, YejM binds to LPS molecules that accumulate in the outer leaflet of the IM, allowing LapB to bind LpxC and direct it for proteolysis by FtsH. Lipid A is depicted in purple and the core and O-antigen domains of LPS are depicted in blue . LPS, lipopolysaccharide; IM, inner membrane; LapB, lipopolysaccharide assembly protein B. Alternative signals modulating Ec LpxC abundance Although the picture of how LpxC is regulated in E. coli is becoming clearer, there are many observations that suggest additional complexity may exist in the control of lipid A biosynthesis. Stimuli that control Ec LpxC levels have been reported that, at first glance, are not accounted for with our current understanding of the YejM-LapB-FtsH system. In particular, several studies have highlighted the influence of perturbations to OM asymmetry on Ec LpxC regulation. In E. coli , OM asymmetry is maintained through the action of multiple systems, including the phospholipase PldA that degrades GPLs localized in the outer leaflet of the OM to produce lysophospholipids and fatty acids ( 68 , 69 ). Under conditions in which GPLs accumulate in the outer leaflet of the OM, PldA activity has been shown to stabilize LpxC and increase LPS biosynthesis ( 70 ). This function of PldA was dependent on the presence of FadD, which imports exogenous fatty acids and simultaneously activates them with coenzyme A (CoA) to produce cytosolic acyl-CoA species ( 70 , 71 , 72 ). Similarly, strains with mutations in yhcB , which encodes a transmembrane protein that has been shown to copurify with LapB, exhibit altered Ec LpxC abundance in addition to many pleiotropic phenotypes often associated with defects in cell envelope integrity ( 73 , 74 ). However, a recent report indicated that the effects of YhcB on Ec LpxC are likely indirect due to its modulation of fatty acid biosynthesis to alter GPL production ( 75 ). In the absence of YhcB, the ratio of GPLs to lipid A elevates, presumably causing an accumulation of mislocalized GPLs in the outer leaflet of the OM that serve as substrates for PldA to indirectly impact Ec LpxC levels ( 75 ). These results support an attractive model whereby an increase in mislocalized GPLs that result from reduced LPS biosynthesis, increased GPL biosynthesis, or other OM perturbations may be sensed to inform the cytosolic production of lipid A. The mechanism by which acyl-CoA species might influence Ec LpxC is unknown but addition of exogenous palmitate to growing E. coli cultures has similarly been shown to stabilize Ec LpxC ( 76 ). It is notable that palmitoyl-CoA has been reported to inhibit the activity of the essential FAS II enzyme FabI, and a reduction in FabI activity has, in turn, been reported to increase Ec LpxC levels, perhaps explaining why Ec LpxC might be sensitive to palmitoyl-CoA ( 39 , 77 ). Alternatively, long-chain acyl-CoA species derived from exogenous fatty acids have been recently suggested to indirectly increase long-chain acyl-ACP species, which reduces the production of nascent acyl-ACPs through the inhibition of acetyl-CoA carboxylase ( 78 , 79 ). Thus, the addition of exogenous long-chain fatty acids to E. coli led to a rapid and dramatic remodeling of the acyl-ACP chemical landscape, including a reduction in the LpxA substrate R -3-hydroxymyristoyl-ACP ( 78 ). Perhaps consistent with this, exogenous addition of oleate to growing cultures has been shown to reduce LPS levels ( 80 ). As such, it is possible that the stabilization of Ec LpxC observed upon addition of exogenous fatty acids is a result of reduced LPS produced as a function of decreased substrate availability. However, future work is needed to clarify if PldA-mediated phospholipid degradation mirrors the effects of exogenous fatty acid addition on de novo fatty acid biosynthesis and how these alterations directly impact Ec LpxC regulation. Ec LpxC turnover has also been shown to be responsive to growth rate: under fast-growth conditions Ec LpxC is relatively stable (with a half-life up to 2 h), but in conditions in which growth is slow, Ec LpxC is rapidly turned over (with a half-life as low as 4 min) ( 81 ). This effect appears to be specific to Ec LpxC, as the opposite is observed for the other FtsH substrate CII, which is rapidly degraded under fast-growth conditions but has an extended half-life when cells are grown at lower temperatures ( 82 ). The influence of growth rate on Ec LpxC stability was further shown to be mediated at least in part by (p)ppGpp, the secondary messenger that controls the stringent response to alter cellular physiology under various stressful conditions such as fatty acid starvation ( 81 , 83 ). How (p)ppGpp impacts Ec LpxC stability is unknown, but it is likely to be indirect as binding studies did not support a direct interaction between the secondary messenger and either Ec LpxC or FtsH ( 81 , 84 ). Intriguingly, activation of the stringent response impairs GPL biosynthesis at multiple points, including by reducing the activity of FabZ ( 85 , 86 ). Thus, an elevation in (p)ppGpp levels may reduce the GPL:LPS ratio, leading to a buildup of LPS in the outer leaflet of the IM that is sensed by YejM to derepress LapB/FtsH-mediated Ec LpxC degradation. Alternatively, it has been reported LapB production elevates during stationary phase in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, which leads to an increase in LpxC turnover compared to exponential phase ( 87 ). It is therefore possible that changes in protein expression, rather than GPL biosynthesis, could mediate altered Ec LpxC regulation under different growth conditions. Finally, Ec LpxC levels have been shown to be reduced when the small RNA GcvB is overexpressed ( 88 ). GcvB is reported to regulate over 50 mRNAs in E. coli , which are generally involved in amino acid transport and metabolism ( 89 ). Notably, the mRNAs that encode LpxC and its recognized regulators are not among the known targets of GcvB. Deletion of gcvB increases sensitivity to the LpxC inhibitor CHIR-090, perhaps consistent with a role in controlling lipid A biosynthesis ( 88 ). Alternatively, the increased expression of permeases and importers that occurs upon deletion of gcvB may allow increased uptake of CHIR-090, thereby indirectly affecting sensitivity as has been suggested for aminoglycosides ( 90 ). Thus, many questions remain as to how GcvB impacts Ec LpxC abundance and CHIR-090 sensitivity, and further investigation is needed to clarify its involvement in the regulation of lipid A biosynthesis. Relationship to other elements of cell envelope assembly Several lines of evidence suggest that the YejM-LapB-FtsH system is integrated into a larger network of cell envelope assembly factors. In particular, YejM has been shown to copurify with the GPL biosynthesis enzyme PlsY, and LapB has also been shown to copurify with numerous other proteins involved in membrane biogenesis, including LpxA, LpxD, FabZ, YhcB, components of the Lpt system, and the LPS-core assembly protein WaaC ( 41 , 67 , 91 ). LapA (formerly YciS) is encoded in a dicistron with LapB and was also shown to copurify with LapB ( 41 ). Although phenotypes associated with lapA deletion are minor compared with the mutations in lapB , lapA mutants have growth defects on MacConkey agar at high temperatures and also exhibit a slightly altered profile of lipid A species ( 41 ). Consistent with a possible role in influencing FtsH-mediated proteolysis of Ec LpxC, a nonsense mutation in lapA was shown to suppress yejM deletion ( 27 ). However, it is unclear how LapA might influence LapB, and it remains to be validated if its ability to interact with LapB is the basis for the phenotypes associated with lapA mutations. The biological significance of these varied interactions is largely unknown, but it is appealing to speculate that YejM and LapB might serve as critical nodes to orchestrate the coordinated synthesis and assembly of the cell envelope. Although it is now clear that YejM contributes directly to the control of LPS biosynthesis, the possibility that it has a role in other functions of the cell envelope has been reported on several occasions. YejM is composed of a transmembrane domain connected to a globular periplasmic domain by an interfacial domain ( 67 , 92 ) and exhibits strong homology to enzymes involved in cell envelope modifications, including the lipoteichoic acid synthase gene LtaS and the LPS modifying enzyme EptA ( 93 ). Both LtaS and EptA are metalloenzymes that require Mn 2+ and Zn 2+ , respectively, to be catalytically active ( 94 , 95 ), but the residues that coordinate those cations are not conserved in YejM ( 67 ). Instead, the periplasmic domain of YejM has been reported to be a Mg 2+ -dependent phosphatase ( 93 ), although the native substrate has not been identified and phenotypes associated with YejM variants that ablate Mg 2+ binding have not been reported. As such, the biological relevance of YejM's phosphatase activity is unclear. In addition, early reports found that S. Typhimurium and Shigella flexneri strains in which yejM homologs had been mutated exhibited reduced cardiolipin in their OM, leading to a model that YejM might function as a transporter for cardiolipin between the IM and OM ( 96 , 97 ). Mutation of two consecutive arginine residues in a putative cardiolipin binding site in the interfacial domain of the S. Typhimurium YejM homolog PbgA resulted in growth defects and increased OM permeability ( 92 , 97 ). However, it is now clear that the interfacial domain of YejM predominantly binds to LPS and utilizes the same arginine residues that had been previously implicated in cardiolipin transport to the OM ( 67 ). Thus, it is possible that the impacts of YejM/PbgA on cardiolipin transport may be indirect through its influence on LPS biosynthesis and additional work is necessary to disentangle these phenotypes. Regulation of LpxC in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Although FtsH is highly conserved within the bacterial domain, a 2011 study indicated that its ability to regulate LpxC was largely restricted to Enterobacteriaceae ( 98 ). In particular, it was observed that the C terminal region of LpxC from P. aeruginosa ( Pa LpxC) among other organisms diverged significantly from the degron sequence identified in Ec LpxC, suggesting that these organisms may not control LpxC through FtsH-mediated proteolysis ( 98 ). Indeed, FtsH is not essential in P . aeruginosa where it was later shown to play an important role in proteostasis in response to stress as opposed to direct regulation of cell envelope synthesis ( 99 ). In addition, experiments in which Pa LpxC degradation was monitored over time suggested that it was likely not subject to proteolysis at all ( 98 ). Nevertheless, Pa LpxC was still proposed to be a critical regulatory node as heterologous overexpression of Ec LpxC in P. aeruginosa resulted in a dramatic reduction in viability, but overexpression of Pa LpxC had no obvious phenotype ( 98 ). Thus, the authors predicted that the activity of the Pa LpxC was held in check by some regulatory strategy that did not affect Ec LpxC, but it was not clear what factors were involved ( 98 ). Over a decade later it was revealed that Pa LpxC is regulated by a wholly unique mechanism: it is activated by direct binding to the committed enzyme in the competing PG biosynthetic pathway, MurA ( 100 ). The interaction between Pa LpxC and MurA was initially revealed in a coaffinity purification assay to identify interactors of Pa LpxC and subsequently biochemically and physiologically characterized ( 100 ). Biochemical characterization of this interaction showed that MurA and Pa LpxC likely interacted at a 1:1 ratio and that MurA was sufficient to stimulate Pa LpxC activity in vitro ( 100 ). Furthermore, this study showed that expression of a catalytically dead MurA variant (C117S) in otherwise WT P. aeruginosa resulted in both the accumulation of LPS as well as the Pa LpxC product (UDP-3-O-( R -3-hydroxydecanoyl)-glucosamine) ( 100 ). The toxicity of the MurA (C117S) variant depended on its ability to interact with Pa LpxC, indicating that its physiological effects were due to constitutive activation of LPS biosynthesis while being unable to contribute to its canonical function in PG biosynthesis ( 100 ). In addition to being sufficient to activate Pa LpxC, MurA was also shown to be necessary for production of LPS. Indeed, depletion of MurA in P. aeruginosa resulted in reduced LPS levels and changes to cellular morphology similar to that observed upon simultaneous inhibition of LPS and PG biosynthesis with antibiotics that target their respective pathways ( 100 ). Perhaps more importantly, a variant of MurA that was still enzymatically active but could not interact with Pa LpxC was unable to support viability, indicating that MurA's ability to stimulate LPS biosynthesis through activation of Pa LpxC is essential in P. aeruginosa ( 100 ). LpxC and MurA are both highly conserved among proteobacteria, making it challenging to identify other organisms in which MurA-mediated activation of LpxC may be at play. To predict other species that encode MurA/LpxC pairs that may interact, covariation analysis of residues predicted by Alphafold modeling to interact in the P. aeruginosa LpxC-MurA complex was performed ( 100 ). This experiment identified diverse gammaproteobacteria as well as a subset of alphaproteobacteria in which LpxC and MurA were likely to interact, and the accuracy of the predictions was confirmed through subsequent biochemical characterization of a subset of LpxC/MurA cognate pairs ( 100 ). Thus, it is likely that the ability of MurA to stimulate LPS biosynthesis is observed beyond P. aeruginosa and its close relatives, but future work is needed to characterize the physiological effects of LpxC and MurA interaction in those species. Notably, MurA-mediated activation of LpxC was the first example of a committed enzyme in one pathway directly regulating the committed enzyme in a competing biosynthetic pathway. It was proposed that this mechanism of regulation was critical to ensure the proper balance between the LPS and PG biosynthetic pathways: LpxC is only active when bound to MurA, thus reducing the risk of runaway flux through the LPS biosynthetic pathway ( Fig. 4 A ). Intriguingly this regulatory strategy emphasizes the importance of controlling utilization of the metabolic precursor shared between LPS and PG biosynthesis, UDP-GlcNAc. This is in contrast to the YejM-LapB-FtsH module which appears to fine-tune the balance of LPS and GPL biosynthesis by controlling the utilization of β-hydroxyacyl-ACP molecules. It is not clear why some organisms might favor balancing one pair of pathways over the other or if the two systems are mutually exclusive. However, it is enticing to think that diverse metabolic niches require different inputs to control flux through the cell envelope biosynthetic pathways. For example, P. aeruginosa preferentially consumes tricarboxylic acids as a carbon source as opposed to sugars consumed through glycolysis ( 101 ). As such, it seems plausible that UDP-GlcNAc, which is derived from the glycolytic intermediate fructose-6-P, may be more limiting in P. aeruginosa than in E. coli where glucose is a preferred carbon source ( 102 ). Further characterization of the metabolic consequences of misregulated LPS biosynthesis in diverse bacteria will be critical to investigate this model. Although MurA appears to be both necessary and sufficient to stimulate Pa LpxC activity, it is unclear whether it does so constitutively or if its ability to activate Pa LpxC could be modulated in response to certain conditions like that observed for the regulation imparted by YejM-LapB-FtsH. Furthermore, the possibility that additional regulators of Pa LpxC or other P. aeruginosa lipid A biosynthetic enzymes might exist cannot be excluded. Thus, despite the recent progress, much remains unknown about how the lipid A biosynthesis pathway is regulated in P. aeruginosa . Figure 4 Alternative strategies that control lipid A biosynthesis. Graphic depictions of a subset of systems proposed to regulate the production of lipid A in diverse Gram-negative bacteria. Red arrows and T-bars indicate suggested regulation by activation and inhibition, respectively, whereas black arrows indicate enzymatic reactions. Lipid A is depicted in purple and the core and O-antigen domains of LPS are depicted in blue . A , in P. aeruginosa , LpxC is activated by direct binding to MurA, the committed enzyme in peptidoglycan biosynthesis which shares the metabolic precursor UDP-GlcNAc with LPS biosynthesis. B , in N. meningitidis , the LapB homolog Ght promotes LPS biosynthesis by binding to LpxC, although the mechanism of regulation is unclear. C , in Escherichia coli , the first enzyme in lipid A biosynthesis, LpxA, has been reported to be directly inhibited by the essential GTPase ObgE as well as indirectly inhibited by the stringent response secondary messenger (p)ppG.pp. UDP-GlcNAc, uridine diphosphate-N-acetyl-glucosamine; LapB, lipopolysaccharide assembly protein B. Regulation of LpxC in other organisms Alternative mechanisms to control LpxC activity have been reported in diverse bacteria, but the details of these systems are still emerging. In alphaproteobacteria such as Agrobacterium tumefaciens and Rhodobacter capsulatus , LpxC lacks the C-terminal degron that is indicative of FtsH targeting ( 98 ). Nevertheless, when heterologously expressed in E. coli , both A. tumefaciences and R. capsulatus LpxC was degraded ( 98 ). This turnover of LpxC was shown to be due to the Lon protease, suggesting that Lon might serve as a regulator of LpxC in these bacteria ( 98 ). This work has yet to be extended into the native organisms, however, and it is unclear whether the A. tumefaciens and R. capsulatus Lon proteases are capable of recognizing their cognate LpxC and if the interaction is truly regulatory or nonspecific targeting due to LpxC misfolding. LpxC has more recently been reported to be regulated at the level of transcription by two component systems in two other alphaproteobacterial species, Rhodobacter sphaeroides and Caulobacter crescentus ( 103 , 104 ). The NtrYX two component system has been implicated in controlling numerous pleiotropic phenotypes, including adaptation to low O 2 , pathogen intracellular survival, and nitrogen fixation ( 105 , 106 , 107 ). Recent work, however, suggests that, at least in a subset of alphaproteobacteria, NtrYX can also impact cell envelope composition ( 108 , 109 ). In both R. sphaeroides and C. crescentus , NtrYX inhibits the transcription of LpxC ( 103 , 110 ). In R. sphaeroides , an ntrYX mutant exhibited approximately nine-fold elevated lpxC transcript abundance and two-fold accumulation of LPS compared with the WT ( 103 ). In C. crescentus , an additional layer of control is imposed by the ChvGI two component system, which activates lpxC transcription ( 104 ). However, both the NtrYX and ChvGI systems have regulons composed of dozens of genes that are coregulated with LpxC, so these systems do not specifically modulate LpxC activity like those described above. LpxC in betaproteobacteria such as Neisseria meningitidis similarly lack a C-terminal degron. Nevertheless, LapB homologs are observed in these taxa. In one study, the N. meningitidis LapB homolog Ght was suggested to regulate LpxC through an FtsH-independent mechanism by localizing LpxC to the IM to promote LPS biosynthesis ( 111 ). Indeed, ght mutants exhibited reduced LPS biosynthesis and growth defects that could be suppressed through the elevated expression of LpxC ( 111 ). LpxC was further shown to localize to the IM of N. meningitidis in a Ght-dependent manner ( 111 ) ( Fig. 4 B ). Why localization of LpxC to the IM would be beneficial and how that promotes LPS biosynthesis is unknown. Given the recent report that LapB in E. coli has the ability to alter LpxC activity through direct binding, however, it seems possible that Ght might directly influence LpxC activity in addition to its subcellular localization ( 63 ). Thus, Ght may in fact serve as an activator of LpxC, but future work is needed to clarify its function. Regulation of alternative points in lipid A biosynthesis Although the regulation of LxpC is best described, there is mounting evidence that the modulation of other enzymes within the lipid A biosynthesis pathway might control the production of LPS. In particular, the first enzyme in the pathway, LpxA, is emerging as an alternative point of regulation. In E. coli , LpxA activity has recently been shown to be altered by several factors, including (p)ppGpp, the RNase H proteins RnhA and RnhB, and the essential GTPase ObgE ( 84 , 112 ) ( Fig. 4 C ). LpxA activity was consistently reduced in the presence of (p)ppGpp in vitro , although the effects of (p)ppGpp appear to be indirect through binding to the LpxA substrate R -3-hydroxyacyl-ACP ( 84 ) ( Fig. 4 C ). Overexpression of LpxA in a mutant unable to make (p)ppGpp resulted in elevated OM vesiculation and cellular filamentation, but it is unclear if these effects are due to an increase in LpxA activity in the absence of (p)ppGpp or due to additive effects associated with both genetic perturbations ( 84 ). LpxA has also been shown to be inhibited by a dominant-negative variant of ObgE (ObgE∗), an essential GTPase best known for its role in regulating ribosome assembly ( 112 ). The ObgE∗ variant is toxic when expressed in otherwise WT cells and results in phenotypes associated with OM defects in E. coli ( 112 ). Intriguingly, the ObgE∗ phenotypes could be suppressed by mutations in LpxA and further biochemical characterization showed that ObgE∗ and, to a lesser extent, the WT ObgE protein (ObgE WT ) were able to interact directly with LpxA ( 112 ). Although the ability of ObgE WT to target LpxA was muted compared to the ObgE∗ variant, overexpression of ObgE WT had slightly elevated resistance to an antibiotic that targets LpxC and CRISPRi-mediated depletion of ObgE resulted in elevated LPS content, supporting a model by which ObgE inhibits LpxA activity in vivo ( 112 ) ( Fig. 4 C ). In contrast, RnhA and RnhB have been shown to stimulate LpxA activity in vitro, although the conditions in which this regulatory mechanism might be relevant are unclear ( 84 ). LpxA regulators in other species have also been reported. In the gammaproteobacterium Cronobacter sakazakii , LpxA was found to interact with LabP. Consistent with LabP serving as an activator of LpxA, labP mutants had reduced core-lipid A and increased GPL levels ( 113 ). Furthermore, addition of purified LabP was sufficient to stimulate LpxA activity in vitro , suggesting that it directly regulated LpxA ( 113 ). LabP is annotated as an acetyltransferase, but it exhibits substantial homology to LpxA (26.7% identity according to clustal omega v 2.1) ( 114 ). LpxA functions as a trimer ( 115 ), raising the possibility that a heterooligomer between LpxA and LabP may exist under certain conditions in C. sakazakii . In Francisella tularensis , LpxA interacts with another protein, RipA, that is required for replication within host cells ( 116 ). Perhaps counterintuitively, although ripA mutants have reduced LpxA levels, RipA was suggested to inhibit LpxA activity due to the ability of hypomorphic LpxA variants to suppress ripA mutant phenotypes ( 116 ). However, neither mutation of ripA nor the expression of the hypomorphic LpxA variants had a measurable impact on membrane composition ( 116 ). Thus, although it is clear that LpxA has the capacity to interact with a variety of protein partners in diverse organisms, further work is needed to understand the biological significance of these interactions and how they contribute to the regulated production of lipid A. Like LpxC, two other enzymes in the lipid A biosynthesis pathway, LpxD and WaaA, have been reported to be subject to FtsH-mediated proteolysis in E. coli . More specifically, WaaA (also called KdtA) was shown to be rapidly turned over in WT cells but is stabilized by temperature-sensitive FtsH mutants ( 117 ). Further in vitro characterization showed that FtsH was capable of directly degrading WaaA ( 117 ). LpxD was recently identified as an interactor of LapB and subsequent in vivo experiments indicated that it is similarly proteolyzed by FtsH ( 91 ). Like LpxC, LpxD turnover was elevated in stationary phase in an FtsH-dependent manner, suggesting that both LpxC and LpxD may be co-regulated under those conditions ( 91 ). The physiological impacts of misregulated LpxD and WaaA, however, are unknown. As such, it is unclear whether FtsH-mediated proteolysis of these substrates serves to control production of lipid A or some other function. Finally, there is some evidence that the activity of the membrane embedded enzyme LpxK might be regulated in E. coli under certain conditions. In particular, in vitro LpxK activity has been reported to elevate in the presence of phospholipids, particularly cardiolipin ( 118 ). However, it is unclear whether this stimulation constitutes a regulatory response or is simply a result of increased solubility of the hydrophobic LpxK substrate ( 118 ). Perhaps consistent with this, E. coli mutants deficient in cardiolipin exhibit reduced LPS production, but whether this is mediated through reduced LpxK activity is unknown ( 80 ). Additional evidence that LpxK might be regulated comes from the observation that lysates of a temperature-sensitive LpxD mutant have reduced LpxK specific activity ( 119 ). However, the mechanism by which LpxD activity might influence LpxK was unclear. More recently, computational modeling has suggested that LpxK activity might be stimulated by unsaturated fatty acids and that the impact of LpxD is indirectly due to an accumulation of LpxD substrate, R -3-hydroxyacyl-ACP, that feeds into saturated fatty acid biosynthesis ( 76 ). Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism by which unsaturated fatty acids might impact LpxK as well as the potential physiological impacts of LpxK misregulation are unknown. Outlook Since the first report of regulated LPS biosynthesis in 1993, impressive strides have been made to understand how bacteria control flux through the lipid A biosynthesis pathway. The extensive characterization of LpxC regulation in E. coli , in particular, has led to a comprehensive model of regulated LPS synthesis that has revealed foundational principles that are broadly applicable to diverse bacteria. Nevertheless, many questions remain unanswered. It has been well established that the misregulation of LpxC has pleiotropic impacts on cellular physiology, but the reports of regulation of other enzymes in the lipid A biosynthetic pathway raise the possibility that additional layers of control may fine tune the production of LPS, which must be explored in future work. In addition, a deeper understanding of how lipid A biosynthesis is controlled in bacteria outside of the Enterobacteriaceae family is vital for the effective design and implementation of antibiotics that target the pathway. Further characterization of alternative model systems such as P. aeruginosa and N. meningitidis , in which LpxC does not appear to be inhibited by FtsH, have the potential to reveal new paradigms for the regulation of lipid A production. More specifically, uncovering the molecular basis for LpxC activation, the signal(s) that influence its regulation, and the physiological impacts of misregulation in these organisms will broaden our knowledge of the diverse strategies used to control the essential lipid A biosynthetic pathway, providing critical insight into therapeutic development. Recent studies have underscored that the specific mechanisms used to regulate LpxC are not generalizable to all Gram-negative bacteria and, instead, phylogenetically distinct organisms have evolved unique mechanisms to control the production of LPS. Indeed, even in the close E. coli relative S. Typhimurium, slight deviations from the YejM-LPS-LapB partner switching model have been suggested ( 87 ). Due to the diversity of reported LpxC regulators and their lack of broad conservation, it is likely that as-yet-unknown strategies to control LPS biosynthesis exist within the Gram-negative bacterial clade. In particular, the critical priority pathogen A. baumannii does not appear to control LpxC activity through any of the known regulatory mechanisms, despite its close relatedness with E. coli and P. aeruginosa . Intriguingly, lipid A is not essential in A. baumannii , making it possible that the careful control of the lipid A biosynthesis pathway observed in other species is not necessary in this organism ( 44 ). Nevertheless, the negative effects associated with overproduction of lipid A are likely to still apply to A. baumannii . In addition, very little is known about how lipid A biosynthesis is regulated in species outside of the Proteobacterial phylum, increasing the likelihood that an array of regulatory strategies remains to be uncovered. Thus, future work in which the regulation of LPS biosynthesis is characterized in nontraditional model organisms with diverse lifestyles and physiologies will be critical to understanding the selective pressures and varied mechanisms associated with controlled production of lipid A. Conflict of interest The author declares that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article. References 1 Silhavy T.J. Kahne D. Walker S. The bacterial cell envelope Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2 2010 a000414 10.1101/cshperspect.a000414 PMC2857177 20452953 2 Zgurskaya H.I. Lopez C.A. Gnanakaran S. Permeability barrier of Gram-negative cell envelopes and approaches to bypass it ACS Infect. Dis. 1 2015 512 522 26925460 10.1021/acsinfecdis.5b00097 PMC4764994 3 Raetz C.R. Whitfield C. Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71 2002 635 700 12045108 10.1146/annurev.biochem.71.110601.135414 PMC2569852 4 Raetz C.R. Biochemistry of endotoxins Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59 1990 129 170 1695830 10.1146/annurev.bi.59.070190.001021 5 Whitfield C. Trent M.S. Biosynthesis and export of bacterial lipopolysaccharides Annu. Rev. Biochem. 83 2014 99 128 24580642 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060713-035600 6 Bertani B. Ruiz N. Function and biogenesis of lipopolysaccharides EcoSal Plus 8 2018 10.1128/ecosalplus.ESP-0001-2018 PMC6091223 30066669 7 Anderson M.S. Raetz C.R.H. Biosynthesis of Lipid A precursors in Escherichia coli : a cytoplasmic acyltransferase that converts UDP- N -acetylglucosamine to UDP-3- O -( R -3-hydroxymyristoyl)- N -acetylglucosamine J. Biol. Chem. 252 1987 5159 5169 3549716 8 Anderson M.S. Bull H.G. Galloway S.M. Kelly T.M. Mohan S. Radika K. UDP- N -acetylglucosamine acetyltransferase of Escherichia coli : the first step in endotoxin biosynthesis is thermodynamically unfavorable J. Biol. Chem. 268 1993 19858 19865 8366124 9 Anderson M.S. Robertson A.D. Macher I. Raetz C.R.H. Biosynthesis of lipid A in Escherichia coli : identification of UDP-3-0-[(R)-3-hydroxymyristoyl]-α-D-glucosamine as a precursor of UDP-N2,O3-bis [(R)-3-hydroxymyristoyl]-α-D-glucosamine Biochemistry 27 1988 1908 1917 3288280 10.1021/bi00406a017 10 Kelly T.M. Stachula S.A. Raetz C.R. Anderson M.S. The firA gene of Escherichia coli encodes UDP-3-O-(R-3-hydroxymyristoyl)-glucosamine N-acyltransferase. The third step of endotoxin biosynthesis J. Biol. Chem. 268 1993 19866 19874 8366125 11 Babinski K.J. Ribeiro A.A. Raetz C.R. The Escherichia coli gene encoding the UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine pyrophosphatase of lipid A biosynthesis J. Biol. Chem. 277 2002 25937 25946 12000770 10.1074/jbc.M204067200 12 Metzger L.E.t. Raetz C.R. An alternative route for UDP-diacylglucosamine hydrolysis in bacterial lipid A biosynthesis Biochemistry 49 2010 6715 6726 20608695 10.1021/bi1008744 PMC2914816 13 Young H.E. Zhao J. Barker J.R. Guan Z. Valdivia R.H. Zhou P. Discovery of the elusive UDP-diacylglucosamine hydrolase in the lipid A biosynthetic pathway in chlamydia trachomatis mBio 7 2016 e00090 10.1128/mBio.00090-16 PMC4807358 27006461 14 Crowell D.N. Anderson M.S. Raetz C.R.H. Molecular cloning of the genes for lipid A disaccharide synthase and UDP- N -acetylglucosamine acyltransferase in Escherichia coli J. Bacteriol. 168 1986 152 159 3531165 10.1128/jb.168.1.152-159.1986 PMC213431 15 Garrett T.A. Kadrmas J.L. Raetz C.R. Identification of the gene encoding the Escherichia coli lipid A 4'-kinase. Facile phosphorylation of endotoxin analogs with recombinant LpxK J. Biol. Chem. 272 1997 21855 21864 9268317 10.1074/jbc.272.35.21855 16 Belunis C.J. Raetz C.R. Biosynthesis of endotoxins. Purification and catalytic properties of 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid transferase from Escherichia coli J. Biol. Chem. 267 1992 9988 9997 1577828 17 Brozek K.A. Raetz C.R. Biosynthesis of lipid A in Escherichia coli. Acyl carrier protein-dependent incorporation of laurate and myristate J. Biol. Chem. 265 1990 15410 15417 2203778 18 Clementz T. Bednarski J.J. Raetz C.R. Function of the htrB high temperature requirement gene of Escherichia coli in the acylation of lipid A: HtrB catalyzed incorporation of laurate J. Biol. Chem. 271 1996 12095 12102 8662613 10.1074/jbc.271.20.12095 19 Bonifer C. Glaubitz C. MsbA: an ABC transporter paradigm Biochem. Soc. Trans. 49 2021 2917 2927 34821931 10.1042/BST20211030 20 Okuda S. Sherman D.J. Silhavy T.J. Ruiz N. Kahne D. Lipopolysaccharide transport and assembly at the outer membrane: the PEZ model Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14 2016 337 345 27026255 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.25 PMC4937791 21 Sabnis A. Edwards A.M. Lipopolysaccharide as an antibiotic target Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1870 2023 119507 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2023.119507 37268022 22 Zhao J. Cochrane C.S. Najeeb J. Gooden D. Sciandra C. Fan P. Preclinical safety and efficacy characterization of an LpxC inhibitor against Gram-negative pathogens Sci. Transl. Med. 15 2023 eadf5668 10.1126/scitranslmed.adf5668 PMC10785772 37556556 23 Galloway S.M. Raetz C.R.H. A mutant of Escherichia coli defective in the first step of endotoxin biosynthesis J. Biol. Chem. 265 1990 6394 6402 2180947 24 Zhang G. Meredith T.C. Kahne D. On the essentiality of lipopolysaccharide to Gram-negative bacteria Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 16 2013 779 785 24148302 10.1016/j.mib.2013.09.007 PMC3974409 25 Normark S. Transduction and dominance studies of the envA gene present in a chain-forming mutant of Escherichia coli K 12 J. Gen. Microbiol. 57 1969 4903169 4903169 26 Beall B. Lutkenhaus J. Sequence analysis, transcriptional organization, and insertional mutagenesis of the envA gene of Escherichia coli J. Bacteriol. 169 1987 5408 5415 2824434 10.1128/jb.169.12.5408-5415.1987 PMC213965 27 Fivenson E.M. Bernhardt T.G. An essential membrane protein modulates the proteolysis of LpxC to control lipopolysaccharide synthesis in Escherichia coli mBio 11 2020 e00939-e00920 10.1128/mBio.00939-20 PMC7240159 32430473 28 Cian M.B. Giordano N.P. Masilamani R. Minor K.E. Dalebroux Z.D. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium uses PbgA/YejM to regulate lipopolysaccharide assembly during bacteremia Infect. Immun. 88 2019 e00758-e00719 10.1128/IAI.00758-19 PMC6921655 31611279 29 Normark S. Boman H.G. Matsson E. Mutant of Escherichia coli with anomalous cell division and ability to decrease episomally and chromosomally mediated resistance to ampicillin and several other antibiotics J. Bacteriol. 97 1969 1334 1342 4887513 10.1128/jb.97.3.1334-1342.1969 PMC249852 30 Nguyen D. Kelly K. Qiu N. Misra R. YejM controls LpxC levels by regulating protease activity of the FtsH/YciM complex of Escherichia coli J. Bacteriol. 202 2020 e00303-e00320 10.1128/JB.00303-20 PMC7925073 32540932 31 Guest R.L. Same Guerra D. Wissler M. Grimm J. Silhavy T.J. YejM modulates activity of the YciM/FtsH protease complex to prevent lethal accumulation of lipopolysaccharide mBio 11 2020 e00598-e00520 10.1128/mBio.00598-20 PMC7157816 32291302 32 Biernacka D. Gorzelak P. Klein G. Raina S. Regulation of the first committed step in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis catalyzed by LpxC requires the essential protein LapC (YejM) and HslVU protease Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 2020 9088 33260377 10.3390/ijms21239088 PMC7730581 33 Rojas E.R. Billings G. Odermatt P.D. Auer G.K. Zhu L. Miguel A. The outer membrane is an essential load-bearing element in Gram-negative bacteria Nature 559 2018 617 621 30022160 10.1038/s41586-018-0344-3 PMC6089221 34 Fivenson E.M. Rohs P.D.A. Vettiger A. Sardis M.F. Torres G. Forchoh A. A role for the Gram-negative outer membrane in bacterial shape determination Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 120 2023 e2301987120 10.1073/pnas.2301987120 PMC10469335 37607228 35 Simpson B.W. Nieckarz M. Pinedo V. McLean A.B. Cava F. Trent M.S. Acinetobacter baumannii can survive with an outer membrane lacking lipopolysaccharide due to structural support from elongasome peptidoglycan synthesis mBio 12 2021 e03099-e03021 10.1128/mBio.03099-21 PMC8630537 34844428 36 Anderson M.S. Bulawa C.E. Raetz C.R. The biosynthesis of gram-negative endotoxin. Formation of lipid A precursors from UDP-GlcNAc in extracts of Escherichia coli J. Biol. Chem. 260 1985 15536 15541 3905795 37 Strominger J.L. Enzymic transfer of pyruvate to uridine diphosphoacetylglucosamine Biochem. Biophys. Acta 30 1958 645 646 13618279 10.1016/0006-3002(58)90119-7 38 Raetz C.R.H. Molecular genetics of membrane phospholipid synthesis Ann. Rev. Genet. 20 1986 253 295 3545060 10.1146/annurev.ge.20.120186.001345 39 Ogura T. Inoue K. Tatsu T. Suzaki T. Karata K. Young K. Balanced biosynthesis of major membrane components through regulated degradation of the committed enzyme of lipid A biosynthesis by the AAA protease FtsH (HflB) in Escherichia coli Mol. Microbiol 31 1999 833 844 10048027 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01221.x 40 Mostafavi M. Wang L. Xie L. Takeoka K.T. Richie D.L. Casey F. Interplay of Klebsiella pneumoniae fabZ and lpxC mutations leads to LpxC inhibitor-dependent growth resulting from loss of membrane homeostasis mSphere 3 2018 e00508-e00518 10.1128/mSphere.00508-18 PMC6211225 30381354 41 Klein G. Kobylak N. Lindner B. Stupak A. Raina S. Assembly of lipopolysaccharide in Escherichia coli requires the essential LapB heat shock protein J. Biol. Chem. 289 2014 14829 14853 24722986 10.1074/jbc.M113.539494 PMC4031536 42 Richie D.L. Takeoka K.T. Bojkovic J. Metzger L.E.t. Rath C.M. Sawyer W.S. Toxic accumulation of LPS pathway intermediates underlies the requirement of LpxH for growth of acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606 PLoS One 11 2016 e0160918 10.1371/journal.pone.0160918 PMC4985137 27526195 43 Wei J.R. Richie D.L. Mostafavi M. Metzger L.E.t. Rath C.M. Sawyer W.S. LpxK is essential for growth of acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606: relationship to toxic accumulation of lipid A pathway intermediates mSphere 2 2017 e00199-e00117 10.1128/mSphere.00199-17 PMC5555675 28815210 44 Moffatt J.H. Harper M. Harrison P. Hale J.D. Vinogradov E. Seemann T. Colistin resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii is mediated by complete loss of lipopolysaccharide production Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 54 2010 4971 4977 10.1128/AAC.00834-10 PMC2981238 20855724 45 Mahalakshmi S. Sunayana M.R. SaiSree L. Reddy M. yciM is an essential gene required for regulation of lipopolysaccharide synthesis in Escherichia coli Mol. Microbiol. 91 2014 145 157 24266962 10.1111/mmi.12452 46 Nicolaes V. El Hajjaji H. Davis R.M. Van der Henst C. Depuydt M. Leverrier P. Insights into the function of YciM, a heat shock membrane protein required to maintain envelope integrity in Escherichia coli J. Bacteriol. 196 2014 300 309 24187084 10.1128/JB.00921-13 PMC3911248 47 Sorensen P.G. Lutkenhaus J. Young K. Eveland S.S. Anderson M.S. Raetz C.R.H. Regulation of UDP-3-O-[R-3-hydroxymyristoyl]-N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase in Escherichia coli : the second enzymatic step of lipid A biosynthesis J. Biol. Chem. 271 1996 25898 25905 8824222 10.1074/jbc.271.42.25898 48 Langklotz S. Baumann U. Narberhaus F. Structure and function of the bacterial AAA protease FtsH Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1823 2012 40 48 21925212 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.08.015 49 Begg K.J. Tomoyasu T. Donachie W.D. Khattar M. Niki H. Yamanaka K. Escherichia coli mutant Y16 is a double mutant carrying thermosensitive ftsH and ftsI mutations J. Bacteriol. 174 1992 2416 2417 1551860 10.1128/jb.174.7.2416-2417.1992 PMC205870 50 Qu J.-N. Makino S.-I. Adachi H. Koyama Y. Akiyama Y. Ito K. The tolZ gene of Escherichia coli is identified as the ftsH gene J. Bacteriol. 178 1996 3457 3461 8655541 10.1128/jb.178.12.3457-3461.1996 PMC178113 51 Ogura T. Tomoyasu T. Morimura S. Begg K.J. Donachie W.D. Mori H. Structure and function of the ftsH gene in Escherichia coli Res. Microbiol. 142 1991 279 282 1925026 10.1016/0923-2508(91)90041-8 52 Mohan S. Kelly T.M. Eveland S.S. Raetz C.R. Anderson M.S. An Escherichia coli gene (FabZ) encoding (3R)-hydroxymyristoyl acyl carrier protein dehydrase. Relation to fabA and suppression of mutations in lipid A biosynthesis J. Biol. Chem. 269 1994 32896 32903 7806516 53 Heath R.J. Rock C.O. Roles of the FabA and FabZ beta-hydroxyacyl-acyl carrier protein dehydratases in Escherichia coli fatty acid biosynthesis J. Biol. Chem. 271 1996 27795 27801 8910376 10.1074/jbc.271.44.27795 54 Tomoyasu T. Gamer J. Bakau B. Kanemori M. Mori H. Rutman A.J. Escherichia coli FtsH is a membrane-bound, ATP-dependent protease which degrades the heat-shock transcription factor σ32 EMBO J. 14 1995 2551 2560 7781608 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07253.x PMC398369 55 Banuett F. Hoyt M.A. McFarlane L. Echols H. Herzkowitz I. hflB , a new Escherichia coli locus regulating lysogeny and the level of bacteriophage lambda Cii Protein J. Mol. Biol. 187 1986 213 224 2939254 10.1016/0022-2836(86)90229-9 56 Herman C. Ogura T. Tomoyasu T. Hiraga S. Akiyama Y. Ito K. Cell growth and λ phage development controlled by the same essential Escherichia coli gene, Ftsh/hflb Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90 1993 10861 10865 8248182 10.1073/pnas.90.22.10861 PMC47878 57 Akiyama Y. Kihara A. Tokuda H. Ito K. FtsH (HflB) is an ATP-dependent protease selectively acting on SecY and some other membrane proteins J. Biol. Chem. 271 1996 31196 31201 8940120 10.1074/jbc.271.49.31196 58 Kihara A. Akiyama Y. Ito K. Different pathways for protein degradation by the FtsH/HflKC membrane-embedded protease complex: an implication from the interference by a mutant form of a new substrate protein Ycca J. Mol. Biol. 279 1998 175 188 9636708 10.1006/jmbi.1998.1781 59 Herman C. Prakash S. Lu C.Z. Matouschek A. Gross C.A. Lack of a robust unfoldase activity confers a unique level of substrate specificity to the universal AAA protease FtsH Mol. Cell 11 2003 659 669 12667449 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00068-6 60 Fuhrer F. Langklotz S. Narberhaus F. The C-terminal end of LpxC is required for degradation by the FtsH protease Mol. Microbiol. 59 2006 1025 1036 16420369 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04994.x 61 Fuhrer F. Muller A. Baumann H. Langklotz S. Kutscher B. Narberhaus F. Sequence and length recognition of the C-terminal turnover element of LpxC, a soluble substrate of the membrane-bound FtsH protease J. Mol. Biol. 372 2007 485 496 17651755 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.083 62 Shu S. Mi W. Regulatory mechanisms of lipopolysaccharide synthesis in Escherichia coli Nat. Commun. 13 2022 4576 35931690 10.1038/s41467-022-32277-1 PMC9356133 63 Shu S. Tsutsui Y. Nathawat R. Mi W. Dual function of LapB (YciM) in regulating Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide synthesis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 121 2024 e2321510121 10.1073/pnas.2321510121 PMC11046580 38635633 64 Hirvas L. Nurminen M. Helander I.M. Vuorio R. Vaara M. The lipid a biosynthesis deficiency of the Escherichia coli antibiotic-supersensitive mutant LH530 is suppressed by a novel locus, ORF195 Microbiology 143 1997 73 81 9025280 10.1099/00221287-143-1-73 65 Nurminen M. Hirvas L. Vaara M. The outer membrane of lipid A-deficient Escherichia coli mutant LH530 has reduced levels of OmpF and leaks periplasmic enzymes Microbiology 143 1997 1533 1537 9168603 10.1099/00221287-143-5-1533 66 De Lay N.R. Cronan J.E. Genetic interaction between the Escherichia coli AcpT phosphopantetheinyl transferase and the YejM inner membrane protein Genetics 178 2008 1327 1337 18245839 10.1534/genetics.107.081836 PMC2278089 67 Clairfeuille T. Buchholz K.R. Li Q. Verschueren E. Liu P. Sangaraju D. Structure of the essential inner membrane lipopolysaccharide–PbgA complex Nature 584 2020 479 483 32788728 10.1038/s41586-020-2597-x 68 Scandella C.J. Kornberg A. A membrane-bound phospholipase Al purified from Escherichia coli Biochemistry 10 1971 4447 4456 4946924 10.1021/bi00800a015 69 Dekker N. Outer-membrane phospholipase A: known structure, unknown biological function Mol. Microbiol. 35 2000 711 717 10692149 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01775.x 70 May K.L. Silhavy T.J. The Escherichia coli phospholipase PldA regulates outer membrane homeostasis via lipid signaling mBio 9 2018 e00379-e00318 10.1128/mBio.00379-18 PMC5874903 29559571 71 Overath P. Pauli G. Schairer H.U. Fatty acid degradation in Escherichia coli Eur. J. Biochem. 7 1969 559 574 4887396 72 Black P.N. DiRusso C.C. Metzger A.K. Heimert T.L. Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the fadD gene of Escherichia coli encoding acyl coenzyme A synthetase J. Biol. Chem. 267 1992 25513 25520 1460045 73 Wieczorek A. Sendobra A. Maniyeri A. Sugalska M. Klein G. Raina S. A new factor LapD is required for the regulation of LpxC amounts and lipopolysaccharide trafficking Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 2022 9706 36077106 10.3390/ijms23179706 PMC9456370 74 Goodall E.C.A. Isom G.L. Rooke J.L. Pullela K. Icke C. Yang Z. Loss of YhcB results in dysregulation of coordinated peptidoglycan, LPS and phospholipid synthesis during Escherichia coli cell growth PLoS Genet. 17 2021 e1009586 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009586 PMC8741058 34941903 75 Stanley H.M. Trent M.S. Loss of YhcB results in overactive fatty acid biosynthesis mBio 15 2024 e00790-e00724 10.1128/mbio.00790-24 PMC11237625 38742872 76 Emiola A. Andrews S.S. Heller C. George J. Crosstalk between the lipopolysaccharide and phospholipid pathways during outer membrane biogenesis in Escherichia coli Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113 2016 3108 3113 26929331 10.1073/pnas.1521168113 PMC4801286 77 Bergler H. Fuchsbichler S. Hogenauer G. Turnowsky F. The enoyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] reductase (FabI) of Escherichia coli , which catalyzes a key regulatory step in fatty acid biosynthesis, accepts NADH and NADPH as cofactors and is inhibited by palmitoyl-CoA Eur. J. Biochem. 242 1996 689 694 9022698 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0689r.x 78 van den Berg S.P.H. Zoumaro-Djayoon A. Yang F. Bokinsky G. Exogenous fatty acids inhibit fatty acid synthesis by competing with endogenously generated substrates for phospholipid synthesis in Escherichia coli FEBS Lett. 599 2025 667 681 39739509 10.1002/1873-3468.15092 PMC11891403 79 Davis M.S. Cronan J.E. Jr. Inhibition of Escherichia coli acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase by acyl-acyl carrier protein J. Bacteriol. 183 2001 1499 1503 11157970 10.1128/JB.183.4.1499-1503.2001 PMC95031 80 Douglass M.V. Cleon F. Trent M.S. Cardiolipin aids in lipopolysaccharide transport to the gram-negative outer membrane Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118 2021 e2018329118 10.1073/pnas.2018329118 PMC8053950 33833055 81 Schakermann M. Langklotz S. Narberhaus F. FtsH-mediated coordination of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Escherichia coli correlates with the growth rate and the alarmone (p)ppGpp J. Bacteriol. 195 2013 1912 1919 23417489 10.1128/JB.02134-12 PMC3624583 82 Obuchowski M. Shotland Y. Koby S. Giladi H. Gabig M. Wegrzyn G. Stability of CII is a key element in the cold stress response of bacteriophage λ infection J. Bacteriol. 179 1997 5987 5991 9324241 10.1128/jb.179.19.5987-5991.1997 PMC179497 83 Irving S.E. Choudhury N.R. Corrigan R.M. The stringent response and physiological roles of (pp)pGpp in bacteria Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19 2021 256 271 33149273 10.1038/s41579-020-00470-y 84 Bruckner S. Muller F. Schadowski L. Kalle T. Weber S. Marino E.C. (p)ppGpp and moonlighting RNases influence the first step of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Escherichia coli Microlife 4 2023 uqad031 10.1093/femsml/uqad031 PMC10326835 37426605 85 Stein J.P.J. Bloch K.E. Inhibition of E. coli β-hydroxydecanoyl thioester dehydrase by ppGpp Biochem. Biophysical Res. Commun. 73 1976 881 884 10.1016/0006-291x(76)90204-7 15625857 86 Kanjee U. Ogata K. Houry W.A. Direct binding targets of the stringent response alarmone (p)ppGpp Mol. Microbiol. 85 2012 1029 1043 22812515 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08177.x 87 Mettlach J.A. Cian M.B. Chakraborty M. Dalebroux Z.D. Signaling through the Salmonella PbgA-LapB regulatory complex activates LpxC proteolysis and limits lipopolysaccharide biogenesis during stationary-phase growth J. Bacteriol. 206 2024 e00308 e00323 38534107 10.1128/jb.00308-23 PMC11025326 88 Gorzelak P. Klein G. Raina S. Molecular basis of essentiality of early critical steps in the lipopolysaccharide biogenesis in Escherichia coli K-12: requirement of MsbA, cardiolipin, LpxL, LpxM and GcvB Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 2021 5099 34065855 10.3390/ijms22105099 PMC8151780 89 Miyakoshi M. Okayama H. Lejars M. Kanda T. Tanaka Y. Itaya K. Mining RNA-seq data reveals the massive regulon of GcvB small RNA and its physiological significance in maintaining amino acid homeostasis in Escherichia coli Mol. Microbiol. 117 2022 160 178 34543491 10.1111/mmi.14814 PMC9299463 90 Muto A. Goto S. Kurita D. Ushida C. Himeno H. Involvement of GcvB small RNA in intrinsic resistance to multiple aminoglycoside antibiotics in Escherichia coli J. Biochem. 169 2021 485 489 33169170 10.1093/jb/mvaa122 91 Moller A.M. Bruckner S. Tilg L.J. Kutscher B. Nowaczyk M.M. Narberhaus F. LapB (YciM) orchestrates protein-protein interactions at the interface of lipopolysaccharide and phospholipid biosynthesis Mol. Microbiol. 119 2023 29 43 36464488 10.1111/mmi.15005 92 Dong H. Zhang Z. Tang X. Huang S. Li H. Peng B. Structural insights into cardiolipin transfer from the Inner membrane to the outer membrane by PbgA in Gram-negative bacteria Sci. Rep. 6 2016 30815 10.1038/srep30815 PMC4973235 27487745 93 Gabale U. Pena Palomino P.A. Kim H. Chen W. Ressl S. The essential inner membrane protein YejM is a metalloenzyme Sci. Rep. 10 2020 17794 10.1038/s41598-020-73660-6 PMC7576196 33082366 94 Lu D. Wörmann M.E. Zhang X. Schneewind O. Gründling A. Freemont P.S. Structure-based mechanism of lipoteichoic acidsynthesis by Staphylococcus aureus LtaS Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 2009 1584 1589 19168632 10.1073/pnas.0809020106 PMC2635763 95 Wanty C. Anandan A. Piek S. Walshe J. Ganguly J. Carlson R.W. The structure of the neisserial lipooligosaccharide phosphoethanolamine transferase A (LptA) required for resistance to polymyxin J. Mol. Biol. 425 2013 3389 3402 23810904 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.06.029 96 Rossi R.M. Yum L. Agaisse H. Payne S.M. Cardiolipin synthesis and outer membrane localization are required for Shigella flexneri virulence mBio 8 2017 e01199-e01117 10.1128/mBio.01199-17 PMC5574711 28851846 97 Dalebroux Z.D. Edrozo M.B. Pfuetzner R.A. Ressl S. Kulasekara B.R. Blanc M.P. Delivery of cardiolipins to the Salmonella outer membrane is necessary for survival within host tissues and virulence Cell Host Microbe 17 2015 441 451 25856753 10.1016/j.chom.2015.03.003 PMC4978220 98 Langklotz S. Schakermann M. Narberhaus F. Control of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis by FtsH-mediated proteolysis of LpxC is conserved in enterobacteria but not in all gram-negative bacteria J. Bacteriol. 193 2011 1090 1097 21193611 10.1128/JB.01043-10 PMC3067583 99 Basta D.W. Angeles-Albores D. Spero M.A. Ciemniecki J.A. Newman D.K. Heat-shock proteases promote survival of Pseudomonas aeruginosa during growth arrest Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117 2020 4358 4367 32029587 10.1073/pnas.1912082117 PMC7049150 100 Hummels K.R. Berry S.P. Li Z. Taguchi A. Min J.K. Walker S. Coordination of bacterial cell wall and outer membrane biosynthesis Nature 615 2023 300 304 36859542 10.1038/s41586-023-05750-0 PMC9995270 101 Collier D.N. Hager P.W. Phibbs J.,P.V. Catabolite repression control in the Pseudomonads Res. Microbiol. 147 1996 551 561 9084769 10.1016/0923-2508(96)84011-3 102 Ghosh S. Blumenthal H.J. Davidson E. Roseman S. Glucosamine metabolism J. Biol. Chem. 235 1960 1265 1273 13827775 103 Lemmer K.C. Alberge F. Myers K.S. Dohnalkova A.C. Schaub R.E. Lenz J.D. The NtrYX two-component system regulates the bacterial cell envelope mBio 11 2020 e00957-e00920 10.1128/mBio.00957-20 PMC7240162 32430476 104 Stein B.J. Fiebig A. Crosson S. The ChvG-ChvI and NtrY-NtrX two-component systems coordinately regulate growth of Caulobacter crescentus J. Bacteriol. 203 2021 e0019921 10.1128/JB.00199-21 PMC8351639 34124942 105 Carrica Mdel C. Fernandez I. Marti M.A. Paris G. Goldbaum F.A. The NtrY/X two-component system of Brucella spp. acts as a redox sensor and regulates the expression of nitrogen respiration enzymes Mol. Microbiol. 85 2012 39 50 22582926 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08095.x 106 Cheng Z. Lin M. Rikihisa Y. Ehrlichia chaffeensis proliferation begins with NtrY/NtrX and PutA/GlnA upregulation and CtrA degradation induced by proline and glutamine uptake mBio 5 2014 e02141 10.1128/mBio.02141-14 PMC4251998 25425236 107 Foulongne V. Bourg G. Cazevielle C. Michaux-Charachon S. O'Callaghan D. Identification of Brucella suis genes affecting intracellular survival in an in vitro human macrophage infection model by signature-tagged transposon mutagenesis Infect. Immun. 68 2000 1297 1303 10678941 10.1128/iai.68.3.1297-1303.2000 PMC97282 108 Wang D. Xue H. Wang Y. Yin R. Xie F. Luo L. The Sinorhizobium meliloti ntrX gene is involved in succinoglycan production, motility, and symbiotic nodulation on alfalfa Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79 2013 7150 7159 24038694 10.1128/AEM.02225-13 PMC3837732 109 Lemmer K.C. Zhang W. Langer S.J. Dohnalkova A.C. Hu D. Lemke R.A. Mutations that alter the bacterial cell envelope increase lipid production mBio 8 2017 e00513-e00517 10.1128/mBio.00513-17 PMC5442454 28536286 110 Capra E.J. Perchuk B.S. Skerker J.M. Laub M.T. Adaptive mutations that prevent crosstalk enable the expansion of paralogous signaling protein families Cell 150 2012 222 232 22770222 10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.033 PMC3415470 111 Putker F. Grutsch A. Tommassen J. Bos M.P. Ght protein of Neisseria meningitidis is involved in the regulation of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis J. Bacteriol. 196 2014 780 789 24296673 10.1128/JB.00943-13 PMC3911185 112 Dewachter L. Deckers B. Mares-Mejia I. Louwagie E. Vercauteren S. Matthay P. The role of the essential GTPase ObgE in regulating lipopolysaccharide synthesis in Escherichia coli Nat. Commun. 15 2024 9684 39516202 10.1038/s41467-024-53980-1 PMC11549432 113 Kim S. Yoon H. Ryu S. New virulence factor CSK29544_02616 as LpxA binding partner in Cronobacter sakazakii Sci. Rep. 8 2018 835 29339761 10.1038/s41598-018-19306-0 PMC5770445 114 Madeira F. Madhusoodanan N. Lee J. Eusebi A. Niewielska A. Tivey A.R.N. The EMBL-EBI Job Dispatcher sequence analysis tools framework in 2024 Nucleic Acids Res. 52 2024 W521 W525 38597606 10.1093/nar/gkae241 PMC11223882 115 Raetz C.R. Roderick S.L. A left-handed parallel β helix in the structure of UDP-N-Acetylglucosamine acyltransferase Science 270 1995 997 1000 7481807 10.1126/science.270.5238.997 116 Miller C.N. Steele S.P. Brunton J.C. Jenkins R.J. LoVullo E.D. Taft-Benz S.A. Extragenic suppressor mutations in DeltaripA disrupt stability and function of LpxA BMC Microbiol. 14 2014 336 25551578 10.1186/s12866-014-0336-x PMC4322802 117 Katz C. Ron E.Z. Dual role of FtsH in regulating lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Escherichia coli J. Bacteriol. 190 2008 7117 7122 18776015 10.1128/JB.00871-08 PMC2580717 118 Ray B.L. Raetz C.R. The biosynthesis of gram-negative endotoxin. A novel kinase in Escherichia coli membranes that incorporates the 4'-phosphate of lipid A J. Biol. Chem. 262 1987 1122 1128 3027079 119 Roy A.M. Coleman J. Mutations in firA, encoding the second acyltransferase in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, affect multiple steps in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis J. Bacteriol. 176 1994 139 1646 10.1128/jb.176.6.1639-1646.1994 PMC205249 8132458 Acknowledgments Work in the Hummels Lab is supported by the 10.13039/100000057 National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the 10.13039/100000002 National Institutes of Health under Award Number R35GM157138 . I thank Dr Stephen Trent, Dr Courtney Ellison, and members of the Hummels lab for helpful discussions and feedback. Author contributions K. R. H. is responsible for all aspects of this article. Funding and additional information The content is solely the responsibility of the author and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.